doc/20 Added plugin development guide (#21)
exasol/virtual-schema-common-document-files: doc/user_guide/document_type_plugin_development_guide.md

# How to add Support for a new Document Type

This guide explains how to add support for new document types like JSON or JSON-Lines.

If you want to add support for different file backends like BucketFS or S3, use the [dialect development guide](dialect_development_guide.md).

## Create a Repository

The generic adapter loads the document type implementations using a service loader.

> By that, you can implement your document type in a different repository and simply also add it's jar in the `CREATE ADAPTER SCRIPT` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By that, you can implement your document type in a different repository and simply add its jar in the `CREATE ADAPTER SCRIPT` command.
```

## The Document Node Interface
The document Virtual Schema abstracts over the implementation of the document data.
By that, it can support different document types.
For that we use the `DocumentNode` interface structure:

![document node](documentnode.png)

The idea behind this structure is, that this Virtual Schema adapter can traverse your document data, without knowing 
implementation details, like the language-specific data types.

Implement this structure in the following steps:

* Select a name for your document structure (in this example we will use `YOUR_TYPE`)
* Define a Visitor interface for your type (`YOUR_TYPEDocumentNodeVisitor`)

> * Implement wrappers for the java API classes of your data type that implement `DocumentArray`, `DocumentObject`, or `DocumentValue`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Implement wrappers for the Java API classes of your data type that implement `DocumentArray`, `DocumentObject`, or `DocumentValue`.
```

>   You can define multiple classes for each interface. For example `YOUR_TYPENumber` and `YOUR_TYPEString` that both implement `DocumentValue`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  You can define multiple classes for each interface. For example `YOUR_TYPENumber` and `YOUR_TYPEString` both can implement `DocumentValue`.
```

>   As a type parameter for the generic interfaces use your Visitor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  As a type parameter for the generic interfaces, use your Visitor.
```

* Implement a factory that wraps the Java classes of your data type into the newly defined wrapper classes.

If your data type does not has a Java API you can also create your own parser, that implements these interfaces. 
  
 ## The Property to Column Value Extractors
 
 Now we need to implement the value extraction from the class structure that we just defined.
 
 At the moment there are three types of mappings:
 
 * `toVarcharMapping`
 * `toDecimalMapping`
 * `toJsonMappings`
 
 To learn more about the mappings check the [EDML documentation](https://github.com/exasol/virtual-schema-common-document/blob/master/doc/user_guide/edml_user_guide.md).  

We now implement so-called PropertyToColumnValueExtractors that extract the desired value from the class structure.

Therefore we create a class `YOUR_TYPEPropertyToVarcharColumnValueExtractor` that extends `PropertyToVarcharColumnValueExtractor<YOUR_TYPEDocumentNodeVisitor>` and implement the required methods.

> Hint: You can use a visitor for your DocumentNode structure to dispatch between the different types here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Hint**: You can use a visitor for your DocumentNode structure to dispatch between the different types here.
```

Author: ```suggestion
**Hint**: You can use a visitor for your `DocumentNode` structure to dispatch between the different types here.
```

## The DocumentFetcher

Now we implement the `DocumentFetcher` interface.
The `DocumentFetcher` has the task to fetch the document data for a given query from the data source.
For Virtual Schemas that load files, we can use the abstract base implementation `AbstractFilesDocumentFetcher`.  

So start with creating a new class called `YOUR_TYPEDocumentFetcher` that extends `AbstractFilesDocumentFetcher<YOUR_TYPEDocumentNodeVisitor>`.

The interface requires only a single method:

```java
protected abstract Stream<DocumentNode<DocumentVisitorType>> readDocuments(InputStreamWithResourceName loadedFile);
```

Inside this method, you need to load the data and convert it into your class structure implementing the `DocumentNode` interfaces.
The parameter `InputStreamWithResourceName` consists of an `InputStream` from which you can parse the data and a file name, that you can use for logging. 

Implement the method so that it converts the `loadedFile` into a `Stream<DocumentNode<YOUR_TYPEDocumentNodeVisitor>>` by parsing it and using the factory for your class structure.
If your datatype has only one document per file, simply return `Set.of(YOUR_DOCUMTNT_NODE)`.

> Else it is important to stream the data and not to collect it in a List first. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Otherwise it is important to stream the data and not to collect it in a List first. 
```

For that implement an custom `Iterator` and `Iterable` and use:

```java
return StreamSupport.stream(new YOUR_ITERABLE(loadedFile).spliterator(), false);
```

Don't forget to close the input streams!

## The DataLoader

Next, we implement the `DataLoader`. The `DataLoader` runs the whole pipeline from fetching the data, 

> extracting the selecting properties over mapping the result to Exasol values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
extracting and selecting properties over mapping the result to Exasol values.
```

> Luckily most of this implementation is covered in its abstract basis `AbstractDataLoader`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Luckily most of this implementation is covered in its abstract basis `AbstractDataLoader` class.
```

}
```
Note that we return here the `PropertyToColumnValueExtractorFactory` that we defined earlier.

## The FilesDataLoaderFactory

Finally, we add a factory for the newly defined `DataLoader`.
For that create a new class named `YOUR_TYPEFilesDataLoaderFactory`:

```java
public class YOUR_TYPEFilesDataLoaderFactory extends AbstractFilesDataLoaderFactory {
    
    @Override
    public List<String> getSupportedFileExtensions() {
        return List.of(".YOUR_TYPE");
    }

    @Override
    protected DataLoader buildSingleDataLoader(final FileLoaderFactory fileLoaderFactory,
            final SegmentDescription segmentDescription, final String sourceString) {
        return new YOUR_TYPEFilesDataLoader(
                new YOUR_TYPEDocumentFetcher(sourceString, segmentDescription, fileLoaderFactory));
    }
}
```

Now we introduce the new `DataLoaderFactory` to the generic adapter. 
To do so create a file `META_INF/services/com.exasol.adapter.document.files.FilesDataLoaderFactory` with the fully qualified name of your `DataLoaderFactory`. For Example:

```
com.exasol.adapter.document.files.YOUT_TYPEFilesDataLoaderFactory
``` 

## Tests

Don't forget to test your dialect.

> Take a look at JSON document type (in this repository), as an example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Take a look at JSON document type inside the repository as an example.
```

## Support

If you need help, feel free to create a GitHub issue in this repository.

## Tell the World
 

> When you finished your document type implementation, we are happy to list it on the README of this repository, so that others can find it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you are finished your document type implementation, we are happy to list it on the README of this repository, so that others can find it.
```

Author: ```suggestion
When you are finished with your document type implementation, we are happy to list it on the README of this repository, so that others can find it.
```
